A molecular phylogeny of the groupers of the subfamily 
Epinephelinae (Serranidae) with a revised classiﬁ cation of 
the Epinephelini

Matthew T. Craig** and Philip A. Hastings

Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Marine Biology Research Division, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0208, USA
* Present address: Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, P.O. Box 1346, Kaneohe, HI 96744, USA (e-mail: mtcraig@hawaii.edu)

Received: September 20, 2005 / Revised: July 12, 2006 / Accepted: July 21, 2006

Ichthyological

Research

©The Ichthyological Society of Japan 2007

Ichthyol Res (2007) 54: 1–17
DOI 10.1007/s10228-006-0367-x

Abstract  The phylogenetic relationships among the ﬁ shes in the perciform tribe Epinephelini (Ser-
ranidae) have long been poorly understood, in large part because of the numerous taxa that must be 
considered and the large, circumtropical distribution of the group. In this study, genetic data from two 
nuclear (Tmo-4C4 and histone H3) and two mitochondrial (16S and 12S) genes were gathered from 
155 serranid and acanthomorph species as a means of developing a phylogenetic hypothesis using both 
maximum-likelihood and -parsimony criteria. The maximum-parsimony analysis recovered 675 most 
parsimonious trees of length 5703 steps (CI = 0.2523, HI = 0.7477, RI = 0.6582), and the maximum-
likelihood analysis recovered 1 tree at −lnLikelihood = 28279.58341. These phylogenetic hypotheses 
are discussed in light of previous morphological evidence to evaluate the evolutionary history of the 
group and their implications for the currently recognized taxonomy. Our results question the mono-
phyly of the Serranidae, as well as the genera Cephalopholis, Epinephelus, and Mycteroperca as cur-
rently deﬁ ned. The Serranidae is monophyletic only with the exclusion of the genera Acanthistius and 
Niphon. We propose a revised classiﬁ cation of the tribe Epinephelini that reﬂ ects the hypothesized 
shared ancestry of the group and recognizes 11 genera: Alphestes, Cephalopholis, Dermatolepis, Epi-
nephelus, Gonioplectrus, Hyporthodus (which is resurrected for 11 species of deep-bodied groupers), 
Mycteroperca (including 7 species heretofore allocated to Epinephelus), Plectropomus, Saloptia, Triso, 
and Variola.

Key words  Epinephelus · Cephalopholis · Mycteroperca · Perciformes · Molecular phylogeny

The family Serranidae is a group of carnivorous marine 

ﬁ shes  that  inhabit  tropical  and  subtropical  waters 
worldwide. Although more-recent systematic treatments of 
the  family  have  provided  a  reasonable  classiﬁ cation,  the 
family has traditionally been used as a convenient pigeon-
hole  for  lower  percoid  ﬁ shes  whose  afﬁ nities  are  unclear. 
Few studies exist that conﬁ dently place the Serranidae with-
in the larger context of percoid relationships. Imamura and 
Yabe (2002) proposed a novel placement of the Serranidae 
within  a  new  perciform  suborder  Scorpaenoidei  that  in-
cludes the Serranidae (as the Serranoidea) and the scorpae-
noid  lineage  (as  the  Scorpaenoidea),  thus  separating  the 
“scorpaenoid”  and  “cottoid”  scorpaeniform  lineages  into 
two  separate  perciform  suborders.  Other  recent  studies 
(e.g., Dettai and Lecointre, 2004, 2005; Smith and Wheeler, 
2004)  were  unable  to  demonstrate  the  monophyly  of  the 
Serranidae or conﬁ dently place it within the larger acantho-
morph bush.

Our understanding of relationships within the Serranidae 
has  been  equally  tenuous.  Jordan  and  Eigenmann  (1890) 
were the ﬁ rst to attempt to resolve the relationships within 
the Serranidae by deﬁ ning six subfamilies: Serraninae, Epi-

nephelinae,  Anthiinae,  Grammistinae,  Latinae,  and  Per-
cichthyinae. Katayama (1959) provided a thorough review 
of  the  Japanese  serranids,  recognizing  15  subfamilies  and 
reorganizing the family, setting the stage for nearly all sub-
sequent revisions. The ﬁ rst attempt to deﬁ ne a natural (phy-
logenetic)  classiﬁ cation  of  the  family  came  with  Gosline 
(1966), who restricted the Serranidae to Jordan and Eigen-
mann’s  (1890)  Anthiinae,  Epinephelinae,  and  Serraninae. 
Kendall (1976, 1979) agreed that Jordan and Eigenmann’s 
(1890) Serraninae, Epinephelinae, and Anthiinae were nat-
ural groups; however, he included the subfamily Grammisti-
nae based on number and orientation of predorsal bones, 
which are similar to those of the Epinephelinae of Jordan 
and  Eigenmann  (1890).  Within  this  group,  Kendall  (1976, 
1979)  included  Jordan  and  Eigenmann’s  (1890)  liopropo-
mines  and  grammistids.  Gosline’s  hypothesis  of  a 
restricted Serranidae was corroborated by Johnson (1983), 
who  also  placed  Kendall’s  Grammistinae 
the 
Epi nephelinae.  Johnson  (1983)  diagnosed  a  monophyletic 
Epinephelinae based upon the derived feature of loss of an 
autogenous distal radial on the ﬁ rst dorsal-ﬁ n pterygiophore. 
In  this  diagnosis,  Johnson  also  included  the  enigmatic 

into 

2 

M.T. Craig and P.A. Hastings

Niphon  spinosus,  which  he  hypothesized  to  be  the  sister-
group of all other Epinephelinae. Johnson (1983, 1988) di-
vided the Epinephelinae into the ﬁ ve tribes Niphonini, Epi-
nephelini, Diploprionini, Liopropromini, and Grammistini, 
while Baldwin and Johnson (1993) proposed relationships 
among these tribes and demonstrated their monophyly.

The  tribe  Epinephelini  (sensu  Johnson,  1983)  is  one  of 
the most speciose percoid assemblages, with hypothesized 
monophyly  comprising  more  than  150  species  (Nelson, 
1994).  Johnson’s  (1983)  Epinephelini  includes  the  genera 
Aethaloperca,  Alphestes,  Anyperodon,  Cephalopholis, 
Cromileptes,  Dermatolepis,  Epinephelus,  Gonioplectrus, 
Gracila, Mycteroperca, Paranthias, Plectropomus, Saloptia, 
Triso, and Variola. Johnson’s Grammistini includes the gen-
era  Aporops,  Grammistes,  Grammistops,  Pogonoperca, 
Pseudogramma,  Rypticus,  and  Suttonia.  Johnson  (1983) 
also  considered  Aulacocephalus,  Belonoperca,  and  Diplo-
prion to be distinctive and allocated them to the tribe Dip-
loprionini.  Johnson’s  (1983)  Liopropomini  includes  the 
genera Liopropoma, Rainfordia, and Jeboehlkia, while his 
Niphonini is monotypic and restricted to N. spinosus. Bald-
win  and  Johnson  (1993)  reassigned  Jeboehlkia  from  the 
Liopropomini to the Grammistini.

Since  Johnson  (1983,  1988)  and  Baldwin  and  Johnson 
(1993), few systematic studies have been undertaken to re-
solve  the  relationships  or  conﬁ rm  the  monophyly  of  the 
subfamily Epinephelinae or its included genera. Craig et al. 
(2001)  presented  the  ﬁ rst  molecular  analysis  of  the  group 
and  provided  evidence  for  a  monophyletic  Epinephelinae 
and  a  paraphyletic  Cephalopholis  and  Epinephelus.  That 
study, however, was a preliminary analysis and was based 
on a limited number of taxa. In the current study, we used 
DNA sequence data from two mitochondrial and two nu-
clear  genes  from  155  species  of  serranids  and  other  acan-
thomorphs as a means of expanding the study of Craig et 
al.  (2001).  Herein,  we  (1)  show  that  the  Serranidae  as 
currently deﬁ ned are polyphyletic; (2) discuss the interrela-
tionships  of  the  various  tribes  within  the  subfamily  Epi-
nephelinae;  (3)  demonstrate  the  paraphyly  of  the  genera 
Cephalopholis, Epinephelus, and Mycteroperca as currently 
deﬁ ned; and (4) discuss the nomenclatural implications of 
these ﬁ ndings.

Materials and Methods

Specimens were collected in the ﬁ eld by various means in-
cluding spear pole, hook-and-line, and anesthetic, or were 
purchased from ﬁ sh markets at or near the collecting local-
ity,  or  were  purchased  from  the  live  aquarium  trade.  Fin 
clips,  gill  clips,  and/or  muscle  tissue  were  removed  from 
each individual and stored in either 5× net solution (Craig 
et al., 2001) or 70%–90% ethanol. When available, voucher 
specimens  were  deposited  at  the  Scripps  Institution  of 
Oceanography  Marine  Vertebrate  Collection  (Appendix 
1).  Other  tissues  were  obtained  through  various  museum 
collections  that  maintain  frozen  or  ethanol-preserved  col-
lections or from local contacts. Institutional abbreviations 
follow  Leviton  et  al.  (1985).  When  no  voucher  specimen 

was available, a photo voucher was retained by the author 
(M.T.C.) or the collector. One to 3 individuals per species 
were  sequenced  depending  on  availability  to  assess  vari-
ability  of  the  sequences  within  species.  The  individual  se-
quences  were  inspected  for  signiﬁ cant  differences  and,  if 
none or few were present, a consensus sequence was used 
in the ﬁ nal analysis. Overall, tissue samples were obtained 
for 155 species. Of these, we collected representatives of 24 
of  the  30  epinepheline  genera  and  24  species  of  acantho-
morph outgroups (see Appendix 1). Within the tribe Epi-
nephelini, these included 68 of 99 species of  Epinephelus, 
14 of 15 species of Mycteroperca, 16 of 22 species of Cepha-
lopholis,  5  of  7  species  of  Plectropomus,  all  currently  de-
scribed species of Alphestes, Dermatolepis, Paranthias, and 
Variola, and the monotypic genera Aethaloperca, Anyper-
odon, Cromileptes, Gracila, Saloptia, and Triso. The Liop-
ropomini was represented by 2 species of Liopropoma, the 
Diploprionini by Diploprion bifasciatum and Belonoperca 
chabanaudi, and the Grammistini by species in the genera 
Aporops,  Grammistes,  Pogonoperca,  Pseudogramma, 
Rypticus, and Suttonia. The monotypic Niphonini was rep-
resented  by  N.  spinosus.  Several  outgroups  were  selected 
from  the  Acanthomorpha  as  few  molecular  studies 
exist  that  conﬁ dently  place  the  Serranidae  within  the 
larger  context  of  the  acanthomorph  tree.  The  parsimony 
tree  was  rooted  with 
the  beryciform  Hoplostethus 
meditteraneus.

Total DNA was isolated from tissues using the DNeasy 
nucleic  acids  isolation  kit  (Qiagen,  Rockville,  MD,  USA) 
following the manufacturer’s instructions. The polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) was used to amplify portions of two 
mitochondrial  (16S  and  12S)  and  two  nuclear  (Tmo-4C4 
and histone H3) genes (1838 bp). Primer pairs are listed in 
Table 1. PCR reactions using 25 µl were prepared following 
manufacturer’s  instructions  included  with  the  RedTaq 
Readymix (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) with the 
addition  of  10 pmol  of  each  primer  and  5–50 ng  template 
DNA. Following an initial denaturation at 94ºC for 1 min, 
each reaction was subjected to 35 rounds of the following 
thermal cycling conditions: 94ºC for 30 s, 46ºC for 30 s, and 
72ºC for 1 min. PCR products were “cleaned” using Milli-
pore Montage PCR cleanup plates following manufacturer’s 
protocols.

Sequence data were generated on a MegaBace 500 auto-
mated  sequencer.  Sequence  reactions  were  prepared  fol-
lowing manufacturer’s instructions for the ET Terminator 
chemistry with the addition of 5 pmol primer [GE Health-
care (formerly Amersham-Biosciences), Buckinghamshire, 
UK]. Sequences were generated for both the forward and 
reverse directions. In the event of ambiguous base calls or 
heterozygosity  in  nuclear  genes,  bases  were  coded  using 
IUPAC ambiguity codes in the ﬁ nal analysis. All sequences 
were deposited in GenBank, and the accession numbers are 
given in Appendix 1.

Sequence data were edited for miscalls and/or polymor-
phism using Sequencher version 4.2. Edited sequences were 
aligned  using  Clustal  X  with  default  settings  (Thompson 
et  al.,  1997).  The  alignment  was  visually  optimized  using 
MacClade version 3.07 (Maddison and Maddison, 1997). A 

Molecular phylogeny of groupers 

3

Table 1.  Sequencing and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers

Primer name 

Gene 

Sequence 

Reference

16Sar-L 
16Sbr-H 
12Sa 
12Sb 
H3A-L 
H3B 
TMO-F1-5′ 
TMO-R1-5′ 

16S 
16S 
12S 
12S 
Histone III 
Histone III 
TMO4C4 
TMO4C4 

5′-cgcctgtttatcaaaaacat-3′ 
5′-ccggtctgaactcagatcacgt-3′ 
5′-aaactgggattatagaccccactat-3′ 
5′-gagggtgacgggcggtctct-3′ 
5′-atggctcgtaccaagcagacvgc-3′ 
5′-atatccttrggcatratrgtgac-3′ 
5′-cctccggccttcctaaaacctctc-3′ 
5′-catcgtgctcctgggtgacaaagt-3′ 

Palumbi (1996)
Palumbi (1996)
Palumbi (1996)
Palumbi (1996)
Colgan et al. (1998)
Colgan et al. (1998)
Streelman and Karl (1997)
Streelman and Karl (1997)

partition homogeneity test was used to determine the suit-
ability of the four genes for use in a combined dataset. In 
some instances, PCR failed to amplify one or more genes 
for a particular taxon (see Appendix 1). In these instances, 
data were treated as missing (“?”) in the ﬁ nal dataset.

Phylogenetic  analyses  were  performed  using  PAUP* 
4.0b10. Because of the large number of taxa and bases lead-
ing to computational constraints, the parsimony ratchet of 
Nixon (1999) was employed using the batch ﬁ le created by 
PaupRat version 1b (Sikes and Lewis, 2001). Ten rounds of 
the ratchet were each performed using default settings (200 
ratchets). All trees with the lowest tree score were retained 
from  each  ratchet.  Each  shortest  tree  was  found  to  have 
identical length and topology; thus, one representative tree 
was submitted to PAUP*4.0b10 for a ﬁ nal round of branch 
swapping (TBR). Finally, a consensus of all most parsimo-
nious  trees  was  created  in  PAUP*4.0b10.  Similarly,  the 
likelihood  ratchet  was  implemented  in  PAUP*  using  the 
batch  ﬁ le  created  by  Vos  (2003).  The  program  Modeltest 
version 3.6 (Posada and Crandall, 1998) was used to deter-
mine which model of nucleotide substitution best explained 
the  data  using  Aikake  information  criteria  (AIC).  Ten 
rounds of the likelihood ratchet were performed using de-
fault  settings  except  that  the  HKY85+I+G  substitution 
model was used as determined by Modeltest version 3.6. All 
trees with the best likelihood score were retained. For the 
parsimony  analysis,  gaps  were  treated  as  a  “ﬁ fth  base.” 
Relative  support  at  nodes  was  evaluated  using  the  boot-
strap as implemented in PAUP*4.0b10 using 1000 replicates 
and saving a maximum of 1000 trees per replicate for the 
parsimony  analysis.  Computational  constraints  prohibited 
bootstrapping of the likelihood dataset.

Results

Overall, 1900 bases were sequenced from the mitochondrial 
16S, 12S, and the nuclear Tmo-4C4 and histone H3 genes. 
In nearly all cases, within-species variability was negligible 
(<0.5%).  Sixty-two  bases  could  not  be  aligned  unambigu-
ously and were deleted. Of the ﬁ nal 1838 bases, 1011 were 
constant, 176 were parsimony uninformative, and 651 were 
parsimony informative. The partition homogeneity test did 
not support the combination of the four gene datasets (P = 
0.01); however, this test has been shown to produce incon-
sistent results when used with molecular data, particularly 

when variable rates of evolution among genes are apparent 
(Dolphin et al., 2000). As these nuclear and mtDNA genes 
are most certainly evolving at different rates, we chose to 
combine the datasets for the ﬁ nal analyses. The ten rounds 
of the parsimony ratchet algorithm found 7 trees of length 
5703 steps [consistency index (CI) = 0.2523, homoplasy in-
dex  (HI)  =  0.7477,  retention  index  (RI)  =  0.6582].  These 
trees were identical, and a ﬁ nal round of branch swapping 
on 1 of them found 675 equally parsimonious trees. A strict 
consensus  of  these  675  trees  is  presented  in  Fig.  1.  The 
maximum-likelihood (ML) algorithm found 1 tree with only 
minor  differences  in  topology  from  the  parsimony  trees 
(–lnLikelihood = 28279.58341; Fig. 2).

Both tree construction methods found similar topologies 
with only minor differences at deeper nodes, most notably 
the placement of Liopropoma (see Discussion). Some dif-
ferences were also apparent at tip clades, most of which re-
ﬂ ected  the  increased  resolution  afforded  by  ML  analyses. 
Both  analyses  supported  a  monophyletic  Serranidae  with 
the exclusion of the genera Acanthistius and Niphon, while 
the maximum-parsimony (MP) analysis supported serranid 
monophyly  with  the  addition  of  Cirrhitus  (Cirrhitidae). 
Both  analyses  also  supported  the  monophyly  of  the  Epi-
nephelinae  with  the  exclusion  of  Niphon.  The  genus  Epi-
nephelus  formed  two  distinct  clades  in  both  ML  and  MP 
analyses. Separated by a clade containing the genus Mycte-
roperca and several species currently allocated to Epineph-
elus, the two main Epinephelus clades reﬂ ect a paraphyletic 
nature  for  the  genus  as  currently  diagnosed.  The  genus 
Cephalopholis  also  formed  two  distinct,  monophyletic 
groups  with  the  addition  of  species  currently  allocated  to 
Paranthias,  Gracila,  and  Aethaloperca.  The  genera  Al-
phestes and Dermatolepis formed two clades that were sister 
to  one  another.  Saloptia  formed  a  sister  relationship  to  a 
monophyletic Plectropomus. Variola was found to be mono-
phyletic, while the monotypic Triso occupied a position that 
was sister to Epinephelus and Mycteroperca in the MP anal-
ysis, yet embedded within a basal grouper clade in the ML 
analysis.

Discussion

The  genetic  data  gathered  here  from  both  nuclear  and 
mitochondrial  genes  support  the  previously  hypothesized 
paraphyly  of  the  genera  Cephalopholis,  Epinephelus,  and 

Fig. 1.  Strict consensus of 675 most parsimonious trees of length 5703 steps (CI = 0.2523, HI = 0.7477, RI = 0.6582) for 155 species of acantho-
morph ﬁ shes. Numbers above nodes are bootstrap values based on 1000 replicates. Proposed generic designations are shown at right

Molecular phylogeny of groupers 

5

Fig. 2.  Maximum-likelihood tree (–lnLikelihood = 28279.58341) for 155 species of acanthomorph ﬁ shes. Proposed generic designations are shown 
at right

6 

M.T. Craig and P.A. Hastings

Mycteroperca (Craig et al., 2001). The data also support a 
monophyletic  Serranidae  only  with  the  exclusion  of  the 
genera Niphon and Acanthistius. Maximum-parsimony cri-
teria yielded a monophyletic Serranidae with the inclusion 
of Cirrhitus, a result inconsistent with other recent molecu-
lar  studies  (e.g.,  Dettai  and  Lecointre,  2005;  Smith  and 
Wheeler,  2004)  that  was  not  recovered  in  our  maximum-
likelihood analysis. There is no other evidence to support 
the  inclusion  of  Cirrhitus  in  the  Serranidae,  and  we  con-
clude that the maximum-parsimony result may be a conse-
quence of long-branch attraction. Our results also suggest 
that  the  American  groupers  do  not  form  a  monophyletic 
group  as  hypothesized  by  Smith  (1971),  and  that  the 
subgenera  of  Epinephelus  designated  by  him  are  not 
monophyletic.

Limits  of  the  Serranidae.  The  Serranidae  was  deﬁ ned 
and diagnosed by Johnson (1983) based on the presence of 
three reductive specializations (absence of a posterior uro-
neural,  absence  of  the  procurrent  spur,  and  absence  of  a 
third preural cartilage) and one derived feature (presence 
of three opercular spines). Johnson (1983) also provided the 
ﬁ rst  phylogenetic  (cladistic)  analysis  aiming  to  determine 
relationships among serranid ﬁ shes including the Epineph-
elinae. In that study, Johnson (1983) presented morphologi-
cal  data  supporting  a  monophyletic  Serranidae  and  Epi-
nephelinae. That study also placed the enigmatic N. spino-
sus  as  a  primitive  sister-group  to  all  other  epinephelines 
based on a single reductive character, loss of an autogenous 
distal  radial  in  the  ﬁ rst  dorsal-ﬁ n  pterygiophore.  The 
presence  of  three  opercular  spines  in  Niphon  added 
weight to its placement in the Serranidae. Further corrobo-
rative  evidence  came  upon  examination  of  the  larvae  of 
Niphon,  which  possess  a  modiﬁ cation  of  the  dorsal-ﬁ n 
pterygiophores, similar to the condition seen in other epi-
nephelines,  which  is  presumably  an  aid  in  supporting  the 
elongate larval dorsal-ﬁ n spine typical of larvae of the sub-
family  (Johnson,  1988).  Before  this,  the  relationships  of 
Niphon were controversial. Jordan (1923) placed Niphon in 
a  monotypic  family,  yet  most  subsequent  authors  treated 
Niphon  as  a  serranid  with  uncertain  afﬁ nities  (e.g.,  Berg, 
1940;  Katayama,  1959;  McCully,  1961;  Norman,  1966; 
Greenwood et al., 1966). Gosline (1966), however, removed 
Niphon from the Serranidae and placed it within the Per-
cichthyidae,  based  in  part  on  the  presence  of  a  serrated 
lacrimal, which is not present in the Serranidae. Greenwood 
(1977)  hypothesized  that  Niphon  would  eventually  be 
placed into a group with close afﬁ nities to Gosline’s (1966) 
Percichthyidae. Otero (2005) discussed morphological simi-
larities between Niphon and members of the Latidae, pre-
senting some evidence for the removal of this genus from 
the Serranidae.

Although the third opercular spine in Niphon and associ-
ated  larval  characters  discussed  by  Johnson  (1983,  1988) 
would  seem  to  indicate  a  close  afﬁ nity  to  the  Serranidae 
(especially  the  Epinephelinae),  other  morphological  evi-
dence,  combined  with  the  genetic  data  herein,  does  not 
support its inclusion in the Serranidae. Although relatively 
uncommon  among  percoids,  three  opercular  spines  are 
present in some non-serranids, including the epigonid Sphy-

raenops,  and  two  trachinids  (Echiichthys  and  Trachinus; 
Johnson, 1983). Additionally, the three-spine condition in 
Niphon only superﬁ cially resembles that in serranids such 
as Paralabrax. In Niphon, the three spines are elongate and 
thin, forming distinct projections from the posterior margin 
of the opercle. In Paralabrax and other serranids, it is often 
difﬁ cult to establish the presence of all three spines, espe-
cially the ventralmost, as they more closely resemble broad 
ﬂ anges than distinct projections.

Other morphological characters distinguish Niphon from 
the  Serranidae.  The  dorsal  ﬁ n  of  serranids  typically  has 
fewer than 11 spinous rays; among Johnson’s (1983) serra-
nids,  only  Niphon  and  Acanthistius  possess  13  dorsal-ﬁ n 
spines  (Acanthistius  may  have  11–13  dorsal-ﬁ n  spines; 
Heemstra and Heemstra, 2004). Although extremely vari-
able in some percoids, vertebral number also sets Niphon 
apart  from  other  serranids.  Most  serranids  have  24  verte-
brae  (the  subfamily  Anthiinae  and  Acanthistius  have  26; 
Nelson,  1994;  Johnson,  1983);  however,  Niphon  has  30. 
Last, Greenwood (1977) indicated that in Niphon the “cau-
dal  skeleton  is  virtually  identical  with  that  in  the  percich-
thyids.”  He  based  this  conclusion  on  the  presence  of  two 
uroneurals (serranids have only one, due to either a loss of 
one or a fusion of two elements). Although these uroneu-
rals are fused in Niphon (Greenwood, 1977; Johnson, 1983), 
this condition may represent an autapomorphy if the typical 
serranid condition is indeed the result of a loss of the second 
element. Although we have not attempted to polarize the 
morphological characters just discussed, they may support 
exclusion  of  Niphon  from  the  Serranidae  upon  further 
investigation.

Our genetic data place Niphon in a clade including Acan-
thistius and members of the Percidae (see Fig. 1). Although 
we do not propose a close relationship between Niphon and 
the percids, these results indicate that the genus should not 
be  considered  a  serranid.  It  is  likely  that  additional  sam-
pling of acanthomorphs will reveal the true afﬁ nities of Ni-
phon. Indeed, additional genetic data (Smith and Craig, in 
preparation) place Niphon in a clade that includes relatively 
distant acanthomorphs.

The afﬁ nities of Acanthistius are even less clear. Placed 
in the Epinephelinae by Jordan and Eigenmann (1890), and 
later in the Serraninae (Johnson, 1983; Kendall, 1984), the 
genus has most recently been regarded as a member of the 
Anthiinae  (Heemstra  and  Randall,  1986;  Meisler,  1987; 
Heemstra  and  Heemstra,  2004).  Although  Meisler  (1987) 
provided  some  morphological  evidence  for  the  placement 
of Acanthistius within the Anthiinae, he noted that its place-
ment within the Serranidae remained tenuous. Members of 
this  genus  do  possess  three  moderate  opercular  spines 
and  some  reductive  specializations  that  characterize  the 
Serranidae. However, they, similar to Niphon, have greater 
numbers  of  dorsal-ﬁ n  spines  (11–13)  and  vertebrae  (26; 
Johnson,  1983;  Nelson,  1994).  Although  an  expanded 
morphological analysis of basal percomorphs is needed to 
establish  the  polarity  of  these  morphological  characters, 
results from our genetic analysis predict that further study 
will demonstrate that the afﬁ nities of Acanthistius, as well 
as those of Niphon, lie outside the Serranidae.

Molecular phylogeny of groupers 

7

Relationships  within  the  Serranidae.  Beginning  with 
Jordan and Eigenmann (1890), three subfamilies of serranid 
ﬁ shes  have  long  been  recognized:  Anthiinae,  Epinepheli-
nae, and Serraninae. Our genetic data corroborate a mono-
phyletic subfamily Epinephelinae (sensu lato) with the ex-
clusion of Niphon and Acanthistius (see above). Although 
the anthiine and serranine representatives included in our 
analysis  are  both  monophyletic,  greater  taxonomic  sam-
pling within these lineages is needed to adequately test their 
monophyly.

Relationships between the subfamilies of the Serranidae 
are  not  well  corroborated.  In  their  hypothesis  based  on 
morphology, Baldwin and Johnson (1993) recognized that 
their  interrelationships  were  largely  unresolved,  yet  pre-
sented some evidence that the Anthiinae are sister to the 
Epinephelinae  and  that  the  Serraninae  are  sister  to  these 
two.  However,  their  hypothesis  of  interrelationships  was 
based upon the supposition that Acanthistius and Trachy-
poma are primitive anthiines and that Niphon represents a 
primitive epinepheline. Our molecular analysis presents an 
alternative  hypothesis  of  relationships  among  these  sub-
families, suggesting that the Serraninae and Anthiinae have 
a sister-group relationship and that this clade is sister to the 
Epinephelinae (see Figs. 1, 2). The exclusion of Acanthistius 
and Niphon from the Serranidae (as indicated in the data 
presented here) necessitates a reinterpretation of Baldwin 
and  Johnson’s  (1993)  data,  because  the  polarity  of  many 
characters  would  be  based  on  genera  outside  the  family. 
Our data, however, do corroborate a monophyletic subfam-
ily Epinephelinae (sensu lato) with the exclusion of Niphon 
and Acanthistius (see foregoing discussion).

Relationships  within  the  Epinephelinae.  Recent  au-
thors have recognized four tribes within the Epinephelinae 
in addition to the Niphonini (discussed earlier). Our genetic 
data support the monophyly of the Epinephelini as well as 
that  of  the  remaining  tribes.  Baldwin  and  Johnson  (1993) 
evaluated relationships of the tribes within the Epinepheli-
nae  based  on  a  cladistic  analysis  of  morphological  data. 
They  hypothesized  that  the  Grammistini  are  sister  to  the 
Liopropomini, the Diploprionini are sister to these two, and 
the  Epinephelini  are  sister  to  all  three.  Our  genetic  data 
support their hypothesis, with the Epinephelini and Diplo-
prionini  +  Grammistini  +  Liopropomini  forming  two  dis-
tinct,  monophyletic  lineages  in  the  ML  analysis.  A  close 
relationship between the Liopropomini and the grammistin 
+ diploprionin clades has been hypothesized based on mor-
phological data (Kendall, 1979; Johnson, 1983). In our MP 
analysis,  the  Liopropomini  is  sister  to  the  soapﬁ sh  tribes 
Diploprionini,  Grammistini,  and  Epinephelini,  whereas  in 
the  ML  analysis  the  Liopropomini  are  nested  within  the 
soapﬁ shes. These alternative hypotheses for the placement 
of  the  Liopropomini  are  largely  unresolveable  in  the  cur-
rent  analyses  yet  support  a  close  relationship  among  the 
Liopropmini, Grammistini, and Diploprionini.

The placement of the Liopropomini poses an interesting 
question  regarding  the  evolution  of  the  skin  toxin  gram-
mistin, which is present in both soapﬁ sh tribes (Diplopro-
nini  and  Grammistini).  The  chemical  properties  of  this 
toxin  have  been  discussed  in  detail  (Randall  et  al.,  1971; 

Oshima  et  al.,  1974;  Shiomi  et  al.,  2000;  Sugiyama  et  al., 
2005). Baldwin and Johnson (1993) noted that those species 
traditionally  called  soapﬁ shes  (Grammistes,  Grammistops, 
Pogonoperca,  and  Rypticus)  not  only  have  grammistin  in 
epidermal  cells,  but  also  in  specialized  dermal  glands,  a 
feature unique to them. They hypothesized that the epider-
mal  toxin  was  independently  derived  in  the  Grammistini 
and  Diploprionini,  with  a  subsequent  loss  within  some 
members  of  the  Grammistini  (Aporops,  Pseudogramma, 
and Suttonia lack the toxin). The presence of dermal toxin 
cells  in  the  Grammistini  is  unique.  Our  ML  data  support 
this  scenario.  However,  our  MP  analysis, 
in  which 
Liopropoma occupies a sister relationship to all other epi-
nepheline  tribes,  suggests  that  the  skin  toxin  grammistin 
evolved in the ancestor of the liopropomins and the (gram-
mistin  +  diploprionin)  +  epinephelin  clade  and  was 
lost  twice,  once  within  the  Grammistini  and  once  in  the 
ancestor  of  the  Epinephelini.  The  inclusion  of  species 
and genera within the Liopropomini and Grammistini that 
were not represented in this study (Jeboehlkia, Bathyanth-
ias, and Rainfordia) may serve to clarify the relationships 
within  this  tribe  and  thus  the  evolution  of  the  skin  toxin 
grammistin.

Relationships within the Epinephelini.  To date, no hy-
pothesis of relationships within the Epinephelini has been 
presented that adequately represents the large number of 
its included taxa. Craig et al. (2001) presented a preliminary 
analysis based on molecular data and hypothesized its para-
phyly,  and  Maggio  et  al.  (2005)  provided  a  hypothesis  of 
relationships for some eastern Atlantic species of Epineph-
elus  and  Mycteroperca.  Those  studies,  however,  severely 
undersampled the Epinephelini. Our analysis of molecular 
data  supports  a  monophyletic  tribe  Epinephelini  sensu 
Johnson (1983); however, it also supports a rearrangement 
of the taxonomy within this tribe.

Leis (1986) discussed the larval development of Plectro-
pomus and attempted to assign character polarity for sev-
eral  features  based  on  earlier  studies  of  the  ontogenetic 
development  of  other  epinepheline  larvae.  In  his  conclu-
sions, he indicated that the genus Plectropomus was most 
likely the sister-group of the remainder of the Epinephelini 
based (in no small part) on the development of the spina-
tion in the dorsal ﬁ n. Leis (1986) and Johnson (1988) con-
cluded  that  the  8-  or  9-spine  condition  is  plesiomorphic 
within the Epinephelinae (thus, 10 or 11 spines are apomor-
phic). Leis (1986) also found that in Cephalopholis the ﬁ rst 
8 spines are formed directly, while the 9th is formed indi-
rectly by the transformation of the anteriormost dorsal soft 
ray. In grouper species with more than 9 spinous rays, the 
anteriormost  2  soft  rays  of  the  larvae  develop  into  spines 
(Kendall,  1979).  Leis  (1986)  concluded  that  the  indirect 
transformation of soft rays into spines led to the increased 
number  of  spines  seen  in  the  genera  Alphestes,  Anyper-
odon,  Cromileptes,  Epinephelus,  and  Dermatolepis.  Our 
molecular analysis supports the hypothesis that the 8- and/
or 9-dorsal-ﬁ n spine conﬁ guration is indeed plesiomorphic 
within the Epinephelini, as all genera with 8 and 9 spines 
(Aetheloperca, Cephalopholis, Gracila, Paranthias, Plectro-
pomus,  Saloptia,  and  Variola)  occupy  basal  positions  in 

8 

M.T. Craig and P.A. Hastings

both the ML and MP analyses (see Figs. 1, 2). Our data also 
support  the  hypothesis  of  Leis  (1986)  that  Plectropomus, 
along with its close ally Saloptia, is the sister-group to the 
remaining Epinephelini.

The placement of Epinephelus acanthistius of the eastern 
Paciﬁ c  within  Cephalopholis  by  earlier  authors  was  based 
in large part on the presence of nine dorsal-ﬁ n spines in this 
species.  Craig  et  al.  (2001)  demonstrated  that  this  species 
clearly belongs within Epinephelus, implying a reversal of 
the ﬁ n-spine condition. The absence of the transformation 
of the anteriormost soft ray(s) apparently represents such 
a reversal in Epinephelus acanthistius. The transformation 
of  the  dorsal-ﬁ n  ray  series  in  species  of  Epinephelus  with 
ten spines (Epinephelus analogus, Epinephelus exsul, Epi-
nephelus  nigritus)  is  unclear;  however,  these  species  are 
clearly nested within the Epinephelus lineage (Smith, 1971; 
Heemstra and Randall, 1993; Craig et al., 2001; see Figs. 1, 
2) implying that this is a derived condition.

The  nine-spined  groupers  in  the  genera  Aethaloperca, 
Cephalopholis, and Gracila have long been assumed to be 
closely allied (Randall, 1964; Smith-Vaniz et al., 1988). Ran-
dall (1964) erected the genus Gracila for the species Cepha-
lopholis  albomarginata  Fowler  and  Bean,  1930.  In  that 
study, Randall (1964) indicated that although there was a 
close relationship between Gracila and Cephalopholis, the 
species  albomarginata  did  not  belong  in  Cephalopholis 
based on its shorter head and semipelagic behavior. Smith 
(1954) elevated the subgenus Aethaloperca for the species 
Perca rogaa, to which he also allocated albomarginata. Ran-
dall  (1964)  removed  albomarginata  from  Smith’s  Aethe-
loperca  based  on  differences  in  the  dorsal  proﬁ le  of  the 
head (Aethaloperca having a much steeper proﬁ le) and pro-
portional  body  depth  (Aethaloperca  being  much  deeper 
bodied). Katayama (1974) placed a second species, Gracila 
okinawae (= polleni) into Gracila based largely on its trun-
cate  caudal  ﬁ n,  a  condition  that  is  shared  with  Gracila 
albomarginata. Smith-Vaniz et al. (1988) provided a rede-
scription of the species albomarginata and polleni and chose 
to  follow  Randall’s  (1964)  allocation  of  albomarginata  to 
Gracila while refuting Katayama’s placement of polleni and 
placing it in Cephalopholis. Heemstra and Randall (1993) 
also  reported  that  Aethaloperca,  Gracila,  Cephalopholis, 
and Paranthias share trisegmental pterygiophores, a char-
acter  absent  in  many  other  serranid  genera.  Interestingly, 
our  genetic  analyses  indicate  a  sister-species  relationship 
between Cephalopholis polleni and Gracila albomarginata, 
supporting Katayama’s (1974) hypothesis of relationships. 
However, his allocation of both species to Gracila may have 
been  ill  advised  (see  following).  Additionally,  the  steeply 
sloping  forehead  of  Aethaloperca  rogaa  is  similar  to  that 
seen  in  Cephalopholis  igarashiensis  and  all  species  of  the 
somewhat distantly related genus Dermatolepis, indicating 
that this character is variable within the Epinephelinae and 
may not be a reliable indicator of relationships.

Our  genetic  analysis  indicates  a  monophyletic  lineage 
including Aethaloperca, Cephalopholis, Gracila, and Paran-
thias. The presence of nine spines in all four genera supports 
this  relationship,  and  the  development  of  these  spines  in 
larvae  thus  far  examined  indicates  their  homology  (dis-

cussed in detail in Leis, 1986, and Craig et al., 2001). This 
result is not surprising as these genera share other morpho-
logical synapomorphies in addition to nine dorsal-ﬁ n spines. 
McCully (1961) surveyed the scalelets in the posterior ﬁ eld 
among members of the Epinephelinae. He found that in all 
genera with fewer than ten dorsal-ﬁ n spines (except Plec-
tropomus),  the  scales  have  the  ﬁ rst  scalelet  fused  to  the 
structures  anterior  to  it.  In  genera  with  more  than  ten 
dorsal-ﬁ n spines (except Alphestes and Dermatolepis), the 
ﬁ rst scalelet is rarely fused to the main portion of the scale. 
Although Cephalopholis and Aethaloperca retain the plesi-
omorphic fused scalelet, Gracila exhibits the derived state 
of  a  free  ﬁ rst  scalelet  (Smith-Vaniz  et  al.,  1988).  The  re-
maining morphological characters that have been examined 
(neurocranial  structure,  morphometrics,  robustness  of  ﬁ n 
spines, and shape of pectoral ﬁ n) appear either uninforma-
tive or represent autapomorphic states (e.g., the pectoral ﬁ n 
in Aethaloperca is uniquely asymmetrical) and thus may not 
be  useful  for  establishing  relationships.  Our  genetic  data 
indicate that A. rogaa and G. albomarginata are nested well 
within Cephalopholis and consequently should be included 
in that genus. This ﬁ nding implies that the unique morphol-
ogy  of  these  species  was  derived  from  an  ancestor  with  a 
body form typical of species of Cephalopholis, but this hy-
pothesis needs to be tested with a thorough analysis of ad-
ditional  morphological  characters  for  these  and  related 
groupers.

Similarly, our genetic data indicate that both species of 
the  genus  Paranthias  are  nested  within  the  Cephalopholis 
(sensu  lato)  clade,  supporting  previous  hypotheses  of  a 
close relationship between these two genera (Smith, 1966; 
Craig  et  al.,  2001).  The  unique,  semipelagic  lifestyle  of 
Paranthias  has  led  to  several  morphological  innovations 
apparently convergent on those seen in the subfamily An-
thiinae (and shared by Gracila) and has led to its recogni-
tion as a genus independent of Cephalopholis. Several mor-
phological and ontogenetic characters (e.g., development of 
dorsal-ﬁ n  spines,  presence  of  epineural  ribs  on  vertebrae 
1–9) exist, however, that support the inclusion of Paranthias 
within Cephalopholis, and they have been discussed in de-
tail  elsewhere  (Heemstra  and  Randall,  1993;  Craig  et  al., 
2001). Additionally, the ability of Paranthias furcifer to hy-
bridize with Cephalopholis fulva may indicate a close rela-
tionship  (Smith,  1966;  Craig  et  al.,  2001;  Bostrom  et  al., 
2002). Sibley (1957) argued that hybridization should indi-
cate evolutionary relatedness; species should lose this abil-
ity as they diverge along evolutionary pathways. It is worth 
considering, however, that the ability to interbreed, if treat-
ed  as  a  character  in  a  phylogenetic  (cladistic)  framework, 
should represent a plesiomorphic state, and hence is phylo-
genetically uninformative until it is lost and is then treated 
as autapomorphy (Rosen, 1979). Nevertheless, we believe 
that the ability to interbreed indicates a close relationship 
between members of Cephalopholis and Paranthias, a con-
clusion  consistent  with  our  genetic  data.  It  is  therefore 
necessary  to  include  the  species  Paranthias  colonus  and 
Paranthias furcifer with the remaining species of Cephalo-
pholis  to  recognize  only  monophyletic  taxa.  Although  it 
may be argued that to do this fails to recognize the remark-

Molecular phylogeny of groupers 

9

able  evolutionary  change  associated  with  the  semipelagic 
lifestyle of these two species, it provides a taxonomic scheme 
that reﬂ ects the shared ancestry of the group and ﬁ ts well 
within a cladistic framework. In summary, we include the 
species A. rogaa, G. albomarginata, P. colonus, and P. fur-
cifer within the genus Cephalopholis.

The only grouper species with a low number of dorsal-ﬁ n 
spines (eight) not included in our study is the Spanish Flag, 
Gonioplectrus hispanus. The relationships of Gonioplectrus 
within the Epinephelini remain unclear. Kendall and Fahay 
(1979) described the larvae of Gonioplectrus, and indicated 
its placement within the Epinephelinae, and Johnson (1983) 
placed  it  within  the  Epinephelini.  The  presence  of  a  low 
dorsal-ﬁ n spine count and epineural ribs on vertebrae 1–9 
would  seem  to  indicate  a  close  relationship  to  the  genera 
Plectropomus or Cephalopholis. In the absence of compara-
tive genetic material, we retain Gonioplectrus as a distinct 
genus within the Epinephelini.

This  study  conﬁ rms  the  monophyly  of  the  genera  Al-
phestes and Dermatolepis and their sister-group relationship 
(Craig et al., 2001, 2004). Smith-Vaniz et al. (1988) reported 
that  the  smooth  scales  of  Alphestes  and  Dermatolepis  are 
unique compared to those of all other epinephelines. Ad-
ditionally,  all  species  in  these  genera  have  a  high  dorsal 
proﬁ le of the head; however, this character occurs in other 
members of the subfamily (e.g., Cephalopholis sonnerati, C. 
igarashiensis, and Cromileptes altivelis). Alphestes spp. are 
unique in possessing a single, antrorse spine at the corner 
of  the  preopercle  (also  present  in  Gonioplectrus)  and  in 
having  larvae  with  an  extremely  rugose  neurocranium 
(Johnson and Keener, 1984; Heemstra and Randall, 1993). 
Although Smith (1971) demoted Alphestes and Dermatole-
pis to subgeneric status, subsequent treatments recognized 
these lineages at the generic level (Heemstra and Randall, 
1993;  Craig  et  al.,  2001)  consistent  with  results  from  this 
study. Craig et al. (2004) discussed their interrelationships 
in detail.

A surprising result of both the ML and MP analyses was 
the indication of a close relationship between Epinephelus 
cifuentesi, Epinephelus drummondhayi, Triso dermopterus, 
and  the  Alphestes  +  Dermatolepis  clade.  The  afﬁ nities  of 
Triso  have  been  considered  unclear  (e.g.,  Heemstra  and 
Randall,  1993).  Our  data  clearly  suggest  that  despite  its 
morphological similarity to  Paranthias, this genus is more 
closely allied with Alphestes and Dermatolepis. Epinephelus 
cifuentesi and E. drummondhayi appear to lie within Epi-
nephelus  (sensu  lato)  based  on  their  overall  morphology. 
However, in light of the molecular data here, it is necessary 
to  either  include  them  under  one  taxonomic  unit  encom-
passing the Alphestes + Dermatolepis clade and Triso or to 
treat  them  as  independent  taxonomic  units.  Given  the 
placement of Triso in the parsimony analysis, we continue 
to recognize it as a monotypic genus. The situation is more 
complicated  in  E.  cifuentesi  and  E.  drummondhayi,  and 
clearly more data are necessary, both molecular and mor-
phological, to clarify these relationships. We therefore re-
tain these species in Epinephelus pending further study.

In our genetic analysis, all species currently allocated to 
Mycteroperca  are  closely  allied  (see  Figs.  1,  2).  However, 

the  presence  of  species  currently  placed  in  Epinephelus 
(Epinephelus  albomarginatus,  Epinephelus  caninus,  Epi-
nephelus  costae,  Epinephelus  goreensis,  Epinephelus  mar-
ginatus,  Epinephelus  morrhua,  and  Epinephelus  radiatus) 
nested  among  traditional  members  of  the  genus  renders 
Mycteroperca  (sensu  Heemstra  and  Randall,  1993)  para-
phyletic. Traditionally, Mycteroperca and Epinephelus are 
considered as closely related. Species within Mycteroperca 
are regarded as distinct from Epinephelus because of their 
elongate body form and the presence of 10–12 soft anal-ﬁ n 
rays (Epinephelus species typically have 8 or 9; Rosenblatt 
and Zahuranec, 1967; Smith 1971; Heemstra and Randall, 
1993). Most of the species currently allocated to Epinephe-
lus  that  form  a  clade  with  Mycteroperca  species  have  8–9 
anal-ﬁ n  rays,  a  character  heretofore  used  to  justify  their 
placement within Epinephelus. Our analysis indicates that 
the number of anal-ﬁ n rays alone is not a reliable indicator 
of relationships.

No comprehensive phylogenetic treatment exists for the 
genus Mycteroperca. Cervigón and Velasquez (1966) exam-
ined  the  Venezuelan  species,  Rosenblatt  and  Zahuranec 
(1967)  discussed  the  taxonomy  of  the  eastern  Paciﬁ c 
members, Smith (1971) treated the American species, and 
Heemstra (1991) discussed relationships among the Mycte-
roperca rubra species group. Maggio et al. (2005) discussed 
the relationships of Mycteroperca fusca and M. rubra, and 
Craig et al. (2001) discussed genetic relationships among 7 
of 15 species within the genus based on molecular data. The 
present study thus represents the most thorough sampling 
of  the  genus  to  date.  To  retain  a  classiﬁ cation  reﬂ ecting 
monophyly, we hereby consider the species E. marginatus, 
E.  costae,  E.  caninus,  E.  goreensis,  E.  albomarginata,  E. 
morrhua, and E. radiatus to be members of Mycteroperca. 
This placement, although not currently supported by mor-
phological synapomorphies, provides the basis for a more 
detailed morphological study of Mycteroperca.

The remaining species currently in Epinephelus form two 
distinct clades. The ﬁ rst clade represents species that have 
previously been allocated to the Epinephelus niveatus spe-
cies group (Smith, 1971). Smith (1971) hypothesized close 
relationships among the species Epinephelus ﬂ avolimbatus, 
Epinephelus  mystacinus,  Epinephelus  nigritus,  and  Epi-
nephelus niveatus, but did not examine the eastern Paciﬁ c 
species  Epinephelus  exsul  and  treated  the  eastern  Paciﬁ c 
Epinephelus niphobles as a synonym of the western Atlantic 
E.  niveatus.  Heemstra  and  Randall  (1993)  recognized  the 
speciﬁ c status of the latter pair. Our genetic analysis sup-
ports  the  monophyly  of  the  niveatus  species  group  with 
the  addition  of  the  species  E.  acanthistius  and  E.  exsul  of 
the eastern Paciﬁ c, Epinephelus ergastularias, Epinephelus 
octofasciatus,  and  Epinephelus  septemfasciatus  of  the 
Indo-Paciﬁ c, and Epinephelus quernus from the Hawaiian 
archipelago.

All species within the niveatus species group are charac-
terized by having a much deeper body than the remaining 
Epinephelus species. This character is particularly evident 
in juveniles, which have a disk-shaped body (Fig. 3). Both 
juveniles and adults of the remaining species of Epinephelus 
and  Mycteroperca  have  juveniles  and  adults  with  a  much 

10 

Fig. 3.  Juvenile specimens of the 
Epinephelus niveatus species 
complex (A) and the Epineph-
elus fasciatus complex (B). 
[Pictures are reproduced by 
permission of the author 
(P.C.H.) from Heemstra and 
Randall (1993)]

M.T. Craig and P.A. Hastings

more elongate body form (Fig. 3). Additionally, all species 
in the niveatus group share a characteristic drab brown or 
olive coloration that may or may not include several dark 
bars  along  the  body.  The  niveatus  species  group  is  also 
characterized by having pelvic ﬁ ns that insert immediately 
below or in front of the pectoral insertion, whereas the re-
maining Epinephelus species and all Mycteroperca species 
have pelvic ﬁ ns that insert below or behind the pectoral in-
sertion. In members of the niveatus species group, the ar-
ticulation between the cleithrum and the coracoid forms an 
elongate,  triangular  foramen.  In  the  remaining  species  of 
Epinephelus (sensu stricto) and Mycteroperca, this foramen 
is distinctly rounded at the same articulation in both adults 
and juveniles. In other species of the subfamily (e.g., Cepha-
lopholis spp.) this articulation forms the circular foramen; 
thus, the elongate shape serves as a synapomorphy for those 
species in the E. niveatus clade.

The members of the niveatus species group thus represent 
a monophyletic lineage that is distinct from the remaining 
species of Epinephelus. In this light, it is apparent that the 
members of this complex should be considered as a unique 
genus.  Consequently,  we  allocate  the  species  within  the 
clade  to  the  oldest  available  generic  name  for  one  of  its 
members, Hyporthodus.

One troublesome aspect of the phylogenetic hypothesis 
recovered  in  our  analysis  lies  within  the  niveatus  species 
group.  The  lack  of  a  sister-group  relationship  between  E. 
niphobles of the eastern Paciﬁ c and E. niveatus of the west-
ern Atlantic is surprising given that these two species, con-
sidered by some authors to be conspeciﬁ c because of their 
extremely similar morphology, have long been considered 
as  transisthmian  geminates  (Jordan,  1908;  Smith,  1971; 
Heemstra  and  Randall,  1993).  The  niveatus  lineage  does 
include a conﬁ rmed geminate pair, E. exsul of the eastern 

Molecular phylogeny of groupers 

11

Paciﬁ c and E. nigritus of the western Atlantic. Our results 
may be confounded by the relatively small genetic distance 
between species in this clade, which may inhibit the ability 
of  our  analyses  to  resolve  their  relationships  with  the  ge-
netic markers herein employed.

The remaining species of Epinephelus form a monophy-
letic group designated the E. fasciatus species group (Craig 
et al., 2001), which also includes the monotypic genera Any-
perodon  and  Cromileptes.  This  clade  is  characterized  by 
the typically slender-bodied species of Epinephelus whose 
pelvic-ﬁ n  insertion  is  below  or  behind  the  pectoral-ﬁ n 
insertion.

Within  this  clade,  there  are  some  monophyletic  species 
groups  whose  afﬁ nities  have  been  discussed  based  largely 
on color pattern (e.g., the reticulated groupers of Heemstra 
and Randall, 1993). The reticulated species examined here 
(Epinephelus  hexagonatus,  Epinephelus  macrospilos,  Epi-
nephelus maculatus, Epinephelus melanostigma, Epinephe-
lus merra, Epinephelus spilotoceps) form a clade along with 
Epinephelus fasciatus, Epinephelus tauvina, and Epinephe-
lus retouti. Heemstra and Randall (1993) stated that the ju-
veniles of  E.  tauvina are often confused with members of 
the reticulated groupers, and the color pattern of E. tauvina, 
along with the molecular data presented, clearly support its 
inclusion in the reticulated groupers. Epinephelus fasciatus 
is the type species for the genus Epinephelus, and although 
the  color  pattern  of  that  species  and  of  E.  retouti  do  not 
clearly  place  it  with  the  reticulated  groupers,  its  inclusion 
in the clade is supported by high bootstrap support based 
on our genetic data.

The  inclusion  of  the  morphologically  distinct  Anyper-
odon and Cromileptes within the fasciatus species group was 
unexpected, although not surprising. The diagnoses of these 
genera  reﬂ ect  uniquely  derived  features,  or  autapomor-
phies,  which  are  phylogenetically  uninformative.  In  this 
light,  it  seems  most  prudent  based  on  the  genetic  data  to 
include these species within Epinephelus.

New Generic Classiﬁ cation for the Epinephelini

One of the central tenets of phylogenetic systematics is the 
designation  of  monophyletic  groups  and  a  nomenclatural 
system that reﬂ ects groups with shared ancestry (Forey et 
al., 1992). While basing nomenclatural decisions solely on 
molecular data is not ideal, we have highlighted previously 
described morphological characters and provided new char-
acters where possible that may be phylogenetically informa-
tive when considered within the context of character states 
in appropriate outgroups. In light of the genetic and mor-
phological data at hand, we herein present a reclassiﬁ cation 
for genera within the tribe Epinephelini that reﬂ ects a strict, 
cladistic interpretation of these data (Appendix 2). Several 
previously recognized genera were found to be monophy-
letic only with the addition of various morphologically dis-
tinct taxa that have been placed in monotypic genera. The 
genera  Alphestes,  Dermatolepis,  Gonioplectrus,  Plectropo-
mus,  Saloptia,  and  Variola  remain  as  currently  deﬁ ned  in 
Heemstra and Randall (1993). Appendix 2 provides a list of 

currently recognized species of epinepheline ﬁ shes. Unsam-
pled  species  are  referred  to  the  most  appropriate  genus 
incertae  sedis  based  on  a  qualitative  assessment  of  their 
overall morphology and in accordance with previous classi-
ﬁ cations, especially those of Heemstra and Randall (1993). 
Although certain genera within this scheme may be consid-
ered undiagnosable based on the current knowledge of the 
group’s  morphology, 
it  will  undoubtedly  provide  a 
heretofore-unrecognized  starting  point  to  evaluate  both 
previously  discussed  and  new  morphological  characters. 
This  revised  taxonomy  thus  represents  a  framework  that 
may be used to create a sensible taxonomic scheme which 
reﬂ ects the evolution of this diverse group of marine ﬁ shes.

institutions  and 

individuals  provided 
Acknowledgments  Several 
funds facilitating this research: California Sea Grant, American Muse-
um of Natural History Lerner–Gray Fund for Marine Research, Amer-
ican Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists Raney Fund, Beyster 
Family  Fund,  UC  Mexus,  Carl  and  Laura  Hubbs  Fellowship,  Near-
shore Marine Fish Research Program (CSUN), Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography  Graduate  Department  and  Marine  Biology  Research 
Division,  University  of  California  at  San  Diego  (UCSD)  Academic 
Senate, and the Vantuna Research Group. Numerous individuals also 
aided in the collection of specimens and/or organization of collecting 
trips for this research: L. Allen, E. Ballesteros, R. Chapman, T. Chan, 
B. Erisman, G. Fairclough, S. Fennessy, P. Heemstra, H. Ishimori, P. 
Lyons, T. Maggio, M. McGrouther, G. Menezes, M. Nishida, D. Pon-
della II, M. Rivera, D.R. Robertson, E. Sala, Wm. L. Smith, P. Wirtz, 
R. Vetter, Y. Yamanoue, T. Yoshino, F. Young, and others whom we 
most  certainly  have  overlooked.  We  would  like  to  thank  M.  Miya 
(Tokyo Natural History Museum) and C. Klepadlo and H.J. Walker, 
Jr. (SIO) for their curatorial assistance. The Australian Museum and 
University of Kansas Natural History Museum donated tissue samples. 
We are grateful to P.C. Heemstra, J.E. Randall, and R.H. Rosenblatt 
for  critical  reviews  of  earlier  versions  of  this  manuscript.  We  thank 
W.L. Smith (AMNH) and three anonymous reviewers for their excel-
lent  reviews  of  this  manuscript.  We  would  also  like  to  thank  the 
dissertation  committee  of  MTC  for  guidance  and  use  of  laboratory 
facilities: R. Burton, N. Knowlton, R. Rosenblatt, and K. Roy.

Literature Cited

Baldwin  CC,  Johnson  GD  (1993)  Phylogeny  of  the  Epinephelinae 

(Teleostei: Serranidae). Bull Mar Sci 52:240–283

Berg LS (1940) Classiﬁ cation of ﬁ shes, both recent and fossil. Trav Inst 

Zool Acad Sci USSR 5:87–517

Bostrom  MA,  Collette  BB,  Luckhurst  BE,  Reece  KS,  Graves  JE 
(2002)  Hybridization  between  two  serranids,  the  coney  (Cephalo-
pholis fulva) and the creole-ﬁ sh (Paranthias furcifer), at Bermuda. 
Fish Bull 100:651–661

Cervigón  MF,  Velasquez  E  (1966)  Las  especies  del  genero  Myctero-
perca  de  las  costas  de  Venezuela  (Pisces-Serranidae).  Mem  Soc 
Cienc Nat LaSalle 26:77–143

Colgan DJ, McLauchlan A, Wilson GDF, Livingston SP, Edgecombe 
GD, Macaraenas J, Casis G, Gray MR (1998) Histone III and U2 
snRNA  DNA  sequences  and  arthropod  evolution.  Aust  J  Zool 
46:419–437

Craig MT, Pondella DJ II, Hafner JC, Franck JPC (2001) On the status 
of the serranid ﬁ sh genus Epinephelus: evidence for paraphyly based 
on 16S rDNA sequences. Mol Phylogenet Evol 19:121–130

12 

M.T. Craig and P.A. Hastings

Craig MT, Hastings PA, Pondella DJ II (2004) Speciation in the Cen-
tral  American  Seaway:  the  importance  of  taxon  sampling  in  the 
identiﬁ cation of geminate species pairs. J Biogeogr 31:1085–1091

Richardson  SL  (eds)  Ontogeny  and  systematics  of  ﬁ shes.  Special 
publication  1.  American  Society  of  Ichthyologists  and  Herpetolo-
gists, Lawrence, KS, pp 499–510

Craig MT, Bartsch P, Wirtz P, Heemstra PC (2007) Redescription and 
revalidation  of  Alphestes  afer  (Bloch  1793)  as  an  amphi-Atlantic 
grouper species (Perciformes; Serranidae). Cybium (in press)

Kendall AW Jr, Fahay MP (1979) Larvae of the serranid ﬁ sh Gonio-
plectrus hispanus with comments on its relationships. Bull Mar Sci 
29:117–121

Dettai A, Lecointre G (2004) In search of the notothenioid (Teleostei) 

relatives. Antarct Sci 16:71–85

Dettai A, Lecointre G (2005) Further support for the clades obtained 
by multiple molecular phylogenies in the acanthomorph bush. C R 
Biol 328:674–689

Dolphin K, Belshaw R, Orme CDL, Quicke DLJ (2000) Noise and in-
congruence:  interpreting  results  of  the  incongruence  length  differ-
ence test. Mol Phylogenet Evol 17:401–406

Forey  PL,  Humphries  CJ,  Kitching  IL,  Scotland  RW,  Siebert  DJ, 
Williams  DM  (1992)  Cladistics:  a  practical  course  in  systematics. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford

Gosline WA (1966) The limits of the ﬁ sh family Serranidae, with notes 

on other lower percoids. Proc Calif Acad Sci 33:91–111

Greenwood PH (1977) A review of the family Centropomidae (Pisces, 
Perciformes):  an  appendix.  Bull  Br  Mus  (Nat  Hist)  Zool 
31:297–301

Greenwood PH, Rosen DE, Weitzman SH, Myers GE (1966) Phyletic 
studies of teleostean ﬁ shes, with a provisional classiﬁ cation of living 
forms. Bull Am Mus Nat Hist 131:339–455

Heemstra  PC  (1991)  A  taxonomic  revision  of  the  eastern  Atlantic 

Leis  JM  (1986)  Larval  development  in  four  species  of  Indo-Paciﬁ c 
coral  trout  Plectropomus  (Pisces,  Serranidae:  Epinephelinae)  with 
an  analysis  of  relationships  of  the  genus.  Bull  Mar  Sci  38:525–
552

Leviton AE, Gibbs RH Jr, Heal E, Dawson CE (1985) Standards in 
herpetology  and  ichthyology.  Part  I.  Standard  symbolic  codes  for 
institutional  resource  collections  in  herpetology  and  ichthyology. 
Copeia 1985:802–832

Maddison DR, Maddison WP (1997) MacClade V. 4.06. Sinauer Asso-

ciates, Sunderland, MA

Maggio  T,  Andaloro  F,  Hemida  F,  Arculeo  M  (2005)  A  molecular 
analysis of some eastern Atlantic grouper from the Epinephelus and 
Mycteroperca genus. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 321:83–92

McCully HH (1961) The comparative anatomy of the scales of serranid 

ﬁ shes. PhD dissertation. Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA

Meisler  MR  (1987)  Limits  and  relationships  of  serranine  seabasses, 
with revisions of Serranus and Mentiperca (Pisces: Serranidae). PhD 
dissertation. University of Southern California, Los Angeles

Nelson JS (1994) Fishes of the world, 3rd edn. Wiley, New York
Nixon KC (1999) The parsimony ratchet, a new method for rapid par-

groupers (Pisces: Serranidae). Bol Mus Munic Funchal 43:5–71

simony analysis. Cladistics 15:407–414

Heemstra  PC,  Heemstra  E  (2004)  Coastal  ﬁ shes  of  southern  Africa. 
South  African  Institute  for  Aquatic  Biodiversity  and  National 
Inquiry Service Centre, Grahamstown, South Africa

Norman JR (1966) A draft synopsis of the orders, families and genera 
of recent ﬁ shes and ﬁ sh-like vertebrates. British Museum (Natural 
History), London

Heemstra PC, Randall JE (1986) Serranidae. In: Smith MM, Heemstra 
PC (eds) Smith’s sea ﬁ shes. Macmillan South Africa, Johannesburg
Heemstra PC, Randall JE (1993) Groupers of the world. FAO Fisher-

Oshima Y, Shiomi K, Hashimoto Y (1974) Comparison of grammistin 
from  four  species  of  grammistid  ﬁ shes.  Bull  Jpn  Soc  Sci  Fish 
40:223–230

ies synopsis no. 125, vol 16. FAO, Rome

Imamura H, Yabe M (2002) Demise of the Scopaeniformes (Actinop-
erygii:  Percomorpha):  an  alternative  phylogenetic  hypothesis.  Bull 
Fac Fish Hokkaido Univ 53:107–128

Johnson GD (1983) Niphon spinosus: a primitive epinepheline serra-
nid, with comments on the monophyly and intrarelationships of the 
Serranidae. Copeia 1983:777–787

Johnson GD (1988) Niphon spinosus, a primitive epinepheline serra-
nid: corroborative evidence from the larvae. Jpn J Ichthyol 35:7–18
Johnson GD, Keener P (1984) Aid to identiﬁ cation of American grou-

per larvae. Bull Mar Sci 34:106–134

Jordan DS (1908) The law of geminate species. Am Nat 42:73–80
Jordan DS (1923) A classiﬁ cation of ﬁ shes including families and gen-
era  as  far  as  known.  Stanford  Univ  Publ  Univ  Ser  Biol  Sci 
2:77–243

Jordan DS, Eigenmann CH (1890) A review of the genera and species 
of Serranidae found in the waters of America and Europe. Bull US 
Fish Com VIII(1888):329–441

Katayama M (1959) Studies on the serranid ﬁ shes of Japan (1). Bull 

Fac Educ Yamaguchi Univ 8:103–180

Katayama M (1974) Serranid ﬁ shes of the Okinawa Islands (II). Bull 

Fac Educ Yamaguchi Univ 24:99–112

Kendall AW Jr (1976) Predorsal and associated bones in serranid and 

grammistid ﬁ shes. Bull Mar Sci 26:585–592

Otero O (2005) Anatomy, systematics and phylogeny of both recent 
and fossil latid ﬁ shes (Teleostei, Perciformes, Latidae). Zool J Linn 
Soc 141:81–133

Palumbi  S  (1996)  Nucleic  acids  II:  The  polymerase  chain  reaction. 
In:  Hillis  DM,  Moritz  C,  Maple  BK  (eds)  Molecular  systematics. 
Sinauer, Sunderland, pp 205–248

Posada D, Crandall KA (1998) Modeltest: testing the model of DNA 

substitution. Bioinformatics 14:817–818

Randall JE (1964) Notes on the groupers of Tahiti, with description of 

a new serranid ﬁ sh genus. Pac Sci 18:281–296

Randall JE, Aida K, Hibiya T, Mitsuura N, Kamiya H, Hashimoto Y 
(1971) Grammistin, the skin toxin of soapﬁ shes and its signiﬁ cance 
in the classiﬁ cation of the Grammistidae. Publ Seto Mar Biol Lab 
19:157–190

Rosen DR (1979) Fishes from the uplands and intermontane basins of 
Guatemala:  revisionary  studies  and  comparative  geography.  Bull 
Am Mus Nat Hist 162:269–375

Rosenblatt RH, Zahuranec BJ (1967) The Eastern Paciﬁ c groupers of 
the  genus  Mycteroperca,  including  a  new  species.  Cal  Fish  Game 
53:228–245

Shiomi K, Igarashi T, Yokota H, Nagashima Y, Ishida M (2000) Isola-
tion  and  structures  of  grammistins,  peptide  toxins  from  the  skin 
secretion  of 
sexlineatus.  Toxicon 
38:91–103

soapﬁ sh  Grammistes 

the 

Kendall AW Jr (1979) Morphological comparisons of North American 
seabass  larvae  (Pisces:  Serranidae:).  NOAA  Tech  Rep  Circ 
428:1–50

Kendall AW Jr (1984) Serranidae: development and relationships. In: 
Moser HG, Richards WJ, Cohen DM, Fahay MP, Kendall AW Jr, 

Sibley CG (1957) The evolutionary and taxonomic signiﬁ cance of sex-

ual dimorphism and hybridization of birds. Condor 59:161–191

Sikes  DS,  Lewis  PO  (2001)  Beta  software,  V.  1.  PAUPRat:  PAUP* 
implementation  of  the  parsimony  ratchet.  Dept.  of  Ecology  and 
Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT

Molecular phylogeny of groupers 

13

Smith CL (1954) Four rare serraniform ﬁ shes from east Africa. Ann 

Mag Nat Hist (Ser 12) 7:925–933

Smith  CL  (1966)  Menephorus  Poey,  a  serranid  genus  based  on  two 
hybrids  of  Cephalopholis  fulva  and  Paranthias  furcifer,  with  com-
ments  on  the  systematic  placement  of  Paranthias.  Am  Mus  Novit 
2276:1–11

Smith  CL  (1971)  A  revision  of  the  American  groupers:  Epinephelus 

and allied genera. Bull Am Mus Nat Hist 146:1–241

Smith WL, Wheeler WC (2004) Polyphyly of the mail-cheeked ﬁ shes 
(Teleostei: Scorpaeniformes): evidence from mitochondrial and nu-
clear sequence data. Mol Phylogenet Evol 32:627–646

Smith-Vaniz  WF,  Johnson  GD,  Randall  JE  (1988)  Redescription  of 
Gracila albomarginata (Fowler and Bean) and Cephalopholis polleni 
(Bleeker)  with  comments  on  the  generic  limits  of  selected  Indo-

Paciﬁ c groupers (Pisces: Serranidae: Epinephelinae). Proc Acad Nat 
Sci Phila 140:1–23

Streelman JT, Karl SA (1997) Reconstructing labroid evolution with 

single-copy nuclear DNA. Proc R Soc Lond 264:1011–1020

Sugiyama  N,  Araki  M,  Ishida  M,  Nagashima  Y,  Shiomi  K  (2005) 
Further isolation and characterization of grammistins from the skin 
secretion  of  the  soapﬁ sh  Grammistes  sexlineatus.  Toxicon  45:595–
601

Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak, F, Jeanmougin, F, Higgins DG 
(1997) The CLUSTAL_X windows interface: ﬂ exible strategies for 
multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic 
Acids Res 25:4876–4882

Vos RA (2003) Accelerated likelihood surface exploration: the likeli-

hood ratchet. Syst Biol 52:368–373

Appendix 1.  Species included in this analysis, voucher specimen numbers, and GenBank accession numbers for data gathered in the current 
study

Species 

n 

Voucher number 

16S 

12S 

TMO4C4 

H III

Epinephelini
Aethaloperca rogaa 
Alphestes afer 
A. immaculatus 
A. multiguttatus 
Anyperodon leucogrammicus 
Cephalopholis argus 
C. boenak 
C. cruentata 
C. cyanostigma 
C. formosa 
C. fulva 
C. igarashiensis 
C. leopardus 
C. miniata 
C. nigri 
C. nigripinnis 
C. panamensis 
C. polleni 
C. sonnerati 
C. taeniops 
C. urodeta 
Cromileptes altivelis 
Dermatolepis dermatolepis 
D. inermis 
D. striolata 
Epinephelus acanthistius 
E. adscencionis 
E. aeneus 
E. akaara 
E. albomarginata 
E. amblycephalus 
E. analogus 
E. andersoni 
E. areolatus 
E. awoara 
E. bleekeri 
E. bruneus 
E. caeruleopunctatus 
E. caninus 

2 
2 
1 
2 
3 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
2 
2 
1 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 

SIO 02-138 
SIO 03-49 
SIO 00-92 
SIO 00-95 
SIO 64-235 
PV, D.R. Robertson 
SIO 02-138 
SIO 04-192 
SIO 04-191 
SIO 04-191 
SIO 00-146 
SIO 02-138 
PV, D.R. Robertson 
SIO 64-235 
SIO 04-39 
SIO 04-67 
SIO 00-92 
SIO 04-191 
SIO 64-235 
SIO 04-39 
SIO 02-139 
SIO 02-141 
SIO 64-235 
PV, MTC 
PV, D.R. Robertson 
SIO 00-142 
SIO 00-145 
PV, P. Wirtz 
R. Chapman 
PV, S. Fennesey 
SIO 64-228 
SIO 00-185 
SIO 04-60 
SIO 00-235 
SIO 02-137 
PV, MTC 
PV, MTC 
SIO 02-139 
PV, E. Sala 

AY947565 
AY314003 
AF297290 
AF297305 
AF297306 
AY947555 
AY947598 
AF297323 
AY947594 
AY947603 
AF297292 
AY947599 
AY947560 
AF297321 
AY947604 
AY947605 
AF297313 
AY947627 
AF297307 
AY947589 
AF297325 
AY947628 
AF297317 
AY314005 
AY314004 
AF297318 
AF297314 
AY947593 
AY947600 
AY947590 
AY731070 
AF297302 
AY947592 
AY731076 
AY947558 
AY947626 
AY947562 
AY947563 
AY947585 

AY949367 
AY313982 
AY313980 
AY313981 
AY949379 
AY949357 
AY949325 
AY949385 
AY949389 
AY949370 
AY949395 
AY949326 
AY949327 
AY949400 
AY949451 
AY949382 
AY949396 
AY949371 
AY949404 
AY949387 
AY949408 
AY949328 
AY313984 
AY313979 
AY313989 
AY949376 
AY949381 
AY949441 
AY949442 
AY949378 
AY949434 
AY949330 
AY949383 
AY949391 
AY949331 
AY949366 
AY949399 
AY949374 
AY949428 

AY949225 
AY313992 
AY313994 
AY313991
 
AY949223 
AY949293 
AY949266 
AY949290 
AY949291 
AY949282 
AY949292 
AY949323 
AY949318 
AY949279 
AY949280 
AY949272 
AY949278 
AY949297 
 
AY949277 
AY949286 
AY313988 
AY313987 
AY313989 
 
AY949284 
AY949226 
 
AY949298 
AY949312 
AY949220 
AY949315 
 
AY949227 
 
AY949228 
AY949229 
AY949294

AY949552
AY949455
AY949456

AY949577
AY949472
AY949520
AY949533
AY949517
AY949588
AY949589
AY949457
AY949473
AY949523
AY949581
AY949504
AY949531
AY949553
AY949534
AY949498
AY949538
AY949500
AY949536
AY949573
AY949474
AY949590
AY949487
AY949476
AY949569
AY949477
AY949513
AY949499
AY949478
AY949479
AY949576
AY949554
AY949555
AY949580

14 

Appendix 1.  Continued

M.T. Craig and P.A. Hastings

Species 

n 

Voucher number 

16S 

12S 

TMO4C4 

H III

E. chlorostigma 
E. cifuentesi 
E. clippertonensis 
E. coioides 
E. corrallicola 
E. costae 
E. cyanopodus 
E. daemelii 
E. diacanthus 
E. drummondhayi 
E. ergastularius 
E. exsul 
E. fasciatomaculosus 
E. fasciatus 
E. ﬂ avocaeruleus 
E. ﬂ avolimbatus 
E. fuscogutattus 
E. guttatus 
E. goreensis 
E. hexagonatus 
E. howlandi 
E. itajara 
E. labriformis 
E. lanceolatus 
E. macrospilos 
E. maculatus 
E. malabaricus 
E. marginatus 
E. melanostigma 
E. merra 
E. miliaris 
E. morio 
E. morrhua 
E. multinotatus 
E. mystacinus 
E. nigritus 
E. niphobles 
E. niveatus 
E. octofasciatus 
E. ongus 
E. polyphekadion 
E. quernus 
E. quoyanus 
E. radiatus 
E. retouti 
E. rivulatus 
E. septemfasciatus 
E. spilotoceps 
E. striatus 
E. tauvina 
E. trimaculatus 
E. tukula 
E. undulosus 
E. undulostriatus 
Gracila albomarginata 
Mycteroperca acutirostris 
M. bonaci 
M. fusca 

2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
3 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
2 
2 
1 
2 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 

PV, D.R. Robertson 
SIO 00-138 
SIO 00-186 
SIO 64-235 
PV, MTC 
PV, E. Sala 
SIO 02-138, AMS I.39542007 
PV 
PV, MTC 
SIO 00-152 
AMS I.39542007 
SIO 02-21 
PV, MTC 
SIO 64-235 
SIO 04-67 
SIO 00-150 
AMS I.42844005 
SIO 00-140 
PV, G. Menenzes 
AMNH 120080 
SIO 02-139 
SIO 00-185 
SIO 00-137 
SIO 04-191 
SIO 02-141 
SIO 02-138, AMS I.42844011 
SIO 02-140 
SIO 04-62 
SIO 02-138 
SIO 02-141 
PV, D.R. Robertson 
SIO 00-145 
SIO 02-137 
PV, D.R. Robertson 
SIO 00-138 
SIO 
SIO 64-235 
SIO 00-151 
SIO 02-138 
SIO 02-138 
SIO 02-141 
PV, M. Rivera 
R. Chapman 
SIO 02-141 
SIO 02-139 
SIO 02-141 
SIO 02-137 
PV, D.R. Robertson 
SIO 00-146 
SIO 02-138 
R. Chapman 
R. Chapman 
SIO 64-235 
PV, D.R. Robertson 
PV, MTC 
PV, R. Chapman 
SIO 00-145 
PV, P. Wirtz 

AY731075 
AF297295 
AY731077 
AY947608 
AY947568 
AY947596 
AY731074 
AY947635 
AY947619 
AF297317 
AY947606 
AY947556 
AY947622 
AF297319 
AY947607 
AF297293 
AY947561 
AF297299 
AY947621 
AY947623 
AY947620 
AF297294 
AF297296 
AY947588 
AY731072 
AY731068 
AY947609 
AY947595 
AY947633 
AY947629 
AY947634 
AF297324 
AY947630 
AY428594 
AF297304 
AF297297 
AF297309 
AF297310 
AY947564 
AY947566 
AY947569 
AY947570 
AY731073 
AY947602 
AY947625 
AY947586 
AY947559 
AY731069 
AF297311 
AY731067 
AY731071 
AY947557 
AF297326 
AY947636 
AY947582 
AY947591 
AF297315 
AY947597 

AY949407 
AY949397 
AY949332 
AY949333 
AY949334 
AY949368 
AY949335 
AY949453 
AY949406 
AY313985 
AY949432 
AY949358 
AY949398 
AY949401 
AY949384 
AY949336 
AY949415 
AY949437 
AY949438 
AY949380 
AY949414 
AY949337 
AY426252 
AY949377 
AY949416 
AY949338 
AY949390 
AY949369 
AY949339 
AY949427 
AY949418 
AY949425 
AY949340 
AY426252 
AY949341 
AY949405 
AY949342 
AY949343 
AY949388 
AY949344 
AY949431 
AY949429 
AY949394 
AY949430 
AY949345 
AY949410 
AY949346 
AY949440 
AY949433 
AY949347 
AY949403 
AY949443 
AY949409 
AY949454 
AY949348 
AY949411 
AY949449 
AY949448 

AY949231 
AY949209 
AY949304 
AY949295 
AY949232 
AY949296 
AY949233 
 
AY949274 
AY313993 
AY949230 
AY949222 
AY949324 
 
AY949316 
AY949269 
AY949234 
AY949281 
AY949305 
AY949319 
AY949317 
AY949235 
AY949236 
AY949237 
AY949238 
AY949313 
AY949275 
AY949239 
AY949240 
AY949288 
AY949299 
AY949322 
AY949287 
AY425675 
AY949307 
AY949309 
AY949241 
AY949262 
AY949242 
AY949243 
AY949244 
AY949245 
AY949285 
AY949301 
AY949246 
AY949224 
AY949247 
AY949321 
AY949283 
AY949248 
AY949264 
AY949249 
AY949302 
 
AY949250 
AY949251 
AY949270 
AY949252 

AY949508
AY949480
AY949521
AY949518
AY949459
AY949506
AY949460
AY949587
AY949549
AY949541
AY949575
AY949461
AY949579
AY949524
AY949585
AY949528
AY949510
AY949545
AY949551
AY949462
AY949583
AY949592
AY949566
AY949463
AY949481
AY949482
AY949544
AY949483
AY949591
AY949515
AY949516
AY949484
AY949464
AY949567
AY949485
AY949532
AY949584
AY949535
AY949501
AY949496
AY949509
AY949465
AY949502
AY949519
AY949466
AY949458
AY949568
AY949564
AY949539
AY949467
AY949486
AY949507
AY949505
AY949586
AY949574
AY949514
AY949546
AY949489

Molecular phylogeny of groupers 

Appendix 1.  Continued

15

Species 

n 

Voucher number 

16S 

12S 

TMO4C4 

H III

M. interstitialis 
M. jordani 
M. microlepis 
M. olfax 
M. phenax 
M. prionura 
M. rosacea 
M. rubra 
M. tigris 
M. venenosa 
M. xenarcha 
Paranthias colonus 
P. furcifur 
Plectropomus areolatus 
P. laevis 
P. leopardus 
P. maculatus 
P. oligocanthus 
Saloptia powelli 
Triso dermopterus 
Variola albimarginata 
V. louti 
Niphonini
Niphon spinosus 
Diploprionini
Belonoperca chabanaudi 
Diploprion bifasciatum 
Liopropomini
Liopropoma eukrines 
Liopropoma carmabi 
Grammistini
Aporops sp. 
Grammistes sexlineata 
Pseudogramma polyacantha 
Pseudogramma gregoryi 
Pogonoperca punctata 
Rypticus nigripinnis 
Suttonia sp. 
Anthiine outgroups
Anthias cf anthias 
Hemanthias leptus 
Hemanthias peruanus 
Pronotogrammus multifasciatus 
Pseudanthias squamipinnis 
Serranine outgroups
Centropristes striata 
Cratinus agassizii 
Diplectrum paciﬁ cum 
Paralabrax nebulifer 
Serranus tigrinis 
Serranidae incertae sedis
Acanthistius ocellatus 
Other outgroups
Cirrhitus rivulatus 
Etheostoma blennioides 
Gymnodraco acuticeps 
Haemulon plumieri 
Hoplostethus medditeraneus 

2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
2 
3 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
2 

2 

1 
2 

1 
1 

1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 

1 
1 
1 
2 
2 

1 
1 
1 
2 
1 

1 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

SIO 
SIO 00-144 
SIO 00-148 
SIO 00-89 
SIO 00-145 
PV, D. J. Pondella 
SIO 00-92 
PV, T. Maggio 
UKNHM-BRC T104 
SIO 00-147 
SIO UN-CAT 
SIO 00-89 
SIO 00-125 
PV, MTC 
SIO 64-236 
AMS I.42844017 
SIO 64-235 
PV, MTC 
SIO 02-139 
AMS I.41217002 
SIO 02-138 
SIO 04-191 

SIO 00-174 

SIO 04-191 
SIO 04-191 

SIO 01-11 
PV, MTC 

UKNHM-BRC T804 
PV, MTC 
UKNHM-BRC T695, T696 
UKNHM-BRC T100, T155 
SIO 64-235 
SIO 00-182 
UKNHM-BRC T805 

PV, G. Menezes 
MTC 
SIO 00-185 
SIO 00-139 
SIO 04-51 

UCLA W97-22 
LACM 47328-1 
PV, D.J. Pondella 
SIO 00-97 
SIO 01-127 

AY947632 
AF297329 
AF297312 
AF317512 
AF297303 
AY947583 
AF297300 
AY947587 
AY947574 
AF297291 
AY947637 
AF297301 
AY947584 
AY947613 
AY947614 
AF297298 
AF297320 
AY947615 
AY947631 
AY947601 
AY947567 
AY947577 

AY949359 
AY949435 
AY949373 
AY949360 
AY949450 
AY949361 
AY949350 
AY949364 
AY949452 
AY949419 
AY949445 
AY949351 
AY949372 
AY949447 
AY949444 
AY949352 
AY949423 
AY949386 
AY949375 
AY949365 
AY949412 
AY949363 

AY949221 
AY949303 
AY949253 
AY949276 
AY949265 
AY949254 
AY949268 
AY949255 
AY949217 
AY949273 
 
 
AY949263 
AY949267 
AY949320 
AY949211 
 
AY949300 
 
AY949260 
AY949261 
AY949219 

AY949556
AY949522
AY949490
AY949537
AY949548
AY949557
AY949540
AY949468
AY949560
AY949527
AY949571
AY949491
AY949595
AY949565
AY949542
AY949525
AY949570
AY949547
AY949578
AY949469
AY949495
AY949494

AY947575 

AY949420 

AY949210 

AY949596

AY947580 
AY947576 

AY949422 
AY949329 

 
AY949214 

AY949561
AY949475

AY947581 
AY947579 

AY949426 
AY949349 

AY949208 
AY949310 

AY949488
AY949558

AY947573 
AY539050 
AY947512 
AY947571 
AF297322 
AY947578 
AY947618 

AY947617 
AY947611 
AY947610 
AF297330 
AY947624 

AY072667 
AY072668 
AY072669 
AF297328 
AY072688 

AY949356 
AY949413 
AY949362 
AY949417 
AY949353 
AY949402 
AY949355 

AY949446 
AY949392 
AY949393 
AY949354 
AY949436 

AY949271 
AY539458.1 
AY949212 
AY949213 
AY949218 
AY949258 
AY949311

 
AY539459.1 
AY949306 
AY949257 
AY949308 

AY072656.1 
AY072647.1 
AY072663 
AY072662 
AY072659.1 

AY949216 
AY949289 
AY949215 
AY313990 
AY949259 

AY949471
AY949572
AY949493
AY949492
AY949582
AY949593

AY949550
AY949512
AY949594
AY949511
AY949543

AY949530
AY949526
AY949529
AY949497
AY949503

AMS I.42844022 

AY947612 

AY949421 

AY949314 

AY949470

Wm. L. Smith 
Wm. L. Smith 
Wm. L. Smith 
Wm. L. Smith 
Wm. L. Smith 

AY539059.2 
AY539054.2 
AY539064.2 
AY539057.2 
AY538968.2 

x 
AY372771.1 
U90413 
x 
AY141335 

AY539467.1 
AY539462.1 
AY539472.1 
AY539465.1 
AY539384 

AY539268.1
AY539263.1
AY539273.1
AY539266
AY539177

16 

Appendix 1.  Continued

Species 

Lepidotrigla spinosa 
Morone saxatilis 
Perca ﬂ avescens 
Pleurogrammos azonus 
Polyprion americanus 
Scorpaena gutatta 
Stereolepis gigas 
Trachinus draco 

M.T. Craig and P.A. Hastings

n 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 

Voucher number 

16S 

12S 

TMO4C4 

H III

Wm. L. Smith 
Wm. L. Smith 
Wm. L. Smith 
SIO 01-34 
AMS I.42844002 
Wm. L. Smith 
SIO 03-74 
Wm. L. Smith 

AY539001.2 
AY539046.2 
AY539055.2 
AY539012 
AY947616 
AY538984.2 
AY072683.1 
AY539068.2 

x 
x 
x 
AY949439 
AY949424 
x 
AY072666 
AY141378.1 

 
AY539454.1 
AY539463.1 
AY539424.1 
AY949256 
AY539400.1 
 
AY539476.1 

AY539210.1
AY539255.1
AY539264.1
AY949563
AY949562
AY539193.1
AY949559
AY539277.1

x indicates sequence available but not yet deposited in GenBank; blanks indicate no sequence available; PV, photo voucher
Taxonomy follows traditional scheme (e.g., Heemstra and Randall, 1993); institutional abbreviations follow Leviton et al. (1985)

Appendix  2.  Proposed  classiﬁ cation  for  the  ﬁ shes  of  the 
tribe Epinephelini based on molecular data. For a complete 
list of synonyms, see Heemstra and Randall (1993). Species 
not included in our genetic analysis are listed under insertae 
sedis within the most appropriate genus based on a qualita-
tive assessment of their overall morphology and in accor-
dance with previous classiﬁ cations, especially Heemstra and 
Randall (1993).

Genus Dermatolepis Gill

Type  species:  Dermatolepis  punctatus  Gill  (=  Epinephelus 
dermatolepis Boulenger; replacement name for D. punc-
tatus preoccupied in Epinephelus by Holocentrus puncta-
tus  Bloch).  Type 
locality:  Cape  San  Lucas,  Baja 
California.

Included species: D. dermatolepis (Boulenger), D. inermis 

(Valenciennes), D. striolata (Playfair).

Genus Alphestes Bloch and Schneider

Type species: Epinephelus afer Bloch (by subsequent des-
ignation  of  Jordan  and  Swain).  Type  locality:  Guinea 
(Craig et al., 2007).

Included species: A. afer (Bloch), A. immaculatus Breder, 

A. multiguttatus (Günther).

Genus Cephalopholis Bloch and Schneider

Type  species:  Cephalopholis  argus  Bloch  and  Schneider. 

Type locality: East Indies.

(Valenciennes),  C.  cruentata 

Included species: C. albomarginata (Fowler and Bean), C. 
argus Bloch and Schneider, C. boenak (Bloch), C. colo-
nus 
(Lacepéde),  C. 
cyanostigma  (Valenciennes),  C.  formosa  (Shaw  and 
Nodder), C. fulva (Linnaeus), C. furcifer (Valenciennes), 
C. igarashiensis Katayama, C. leopardus (Lacepéde), C. 
miniata  (Forsskål),  C.  nigri  (Günther),  C.  nigripinnis 
(Valenciennes in Cuvier and Valenciennes), C. panamen-
sis  (Steindachner),  C.  polleni  (Bleeker),  C.  rogaa 
(Forsskål), C. sonnerati (Valenciennes), C. taeniops (Va-
lenciennes), C. urodeta (Schneider).

Species  incertae  sedis:  C.  aitha  Randall  and  Heemstra, 
C.  aurantia  (Valenciennes),  C.  hemistiktos  (Rüppell), 
C.  microprion  (Bleeker),  C.  oligosticta  Randall  and 
Ben-Tuvia,  C.  sexmaculata  (Rüppel),  C.  spiloparaea 
(Valenciennes).

Genus Epinephelus Bloch

Type species: Epinephelus marginalis Bloch (= E. fasciatus 
(Forsskål)  designated  under  the  plenary  powers  of  the 
IZCN, Opinion 93). Type locality: Red Sea.

fasciatomaculosus 

Included  species:  E.  adscensionis  (Osbeck),  E.  aeneus 
(Geoffroy  Saint-Hiliaire),  E.  akaara  (Temminck  and 
Schlegel),  E.  altivelis  (Valenciennes),  E.  amblycephalus 
(Bleeker),  E.  analogus  Gill,  E.  areolatus  (Forsskål),  E. 
awoarra (Temminck and Schlegel), E. bleekeri (Vaillant), 
E.  brunneus  Bloch,  E.  caeruleopunctatus  (Bloch),  E. 
chabaudi  (Castlenau),  E.  chlorostigma  (Valenciennes), 
E.  clippertonensis  Allen  and  Robertson,  E.  coioides 
(Hamilton),  E.  corallicola  (Valenciennes),  E.  cyanopo-
dus  (Richardson),  E.  daemelii  (Günther),  E.  diacanthus 
(Valenciennes),  E. 
(Peters),  E. 
fasciatus (Forsskål), E. ﬂ avocaeruleus (Lacepéde), E. fus-
cogutattus (Forsskål), E. guttatus (Linnaeus), E. hexago-
natus  (Forster),  E.  howlandi  (Günther),  E.  itajara 
(Lichtenstein),  E.  labriformis  (Jenyns),  E.  lanceolatus 
(Bloch),  E.  leucogrammicus  (Valenciennes),  E.  macro-
spilos  (Bleeker),  E.  maculatus  (Bloch),  E.  malabaricus 
(Bloch and Schneider), E. melanostigma Schultz, E. mer-
ra Bloch, E. miliaris (Valenciennes), E. morio (Valenci-
ennes),  E.  multinotattus  (Peters),  E.  ongus  (Bloch),  E. 
polyphekadion  (Bleeker),  E.  quoyanus  (Valenciennes), 
E. retouti Bleeker, E. rivulatus (Valenciennes), E. spilo-
toceps Schultz, E. striatus (Bloch), E. tauvina (Forsskål), 
E.  trimaculatus  (Valenciennes),  E.  tukula  Morgans,  E. 
undulostriatus  (Peters),  E.  undulosus  (Quoy  and 
Gaimard).

Molecular phylogeny of groupers 

17

Species incertae sedis: E. andersoni Boulenger, E. bilobatus 
Randall  and  Allen,  E.  bontoides  (Bleeker),  E.  chloro-
cephalus (Valenciennes), E. cifuentesi Grove and Laven-
berg in Heemstra and Randall, E. drummondhayi Goode 
and  Bean,  E.  epistictus  (Temminck  and  Schlegel),  E. 
erythrurus (Valenciennes), E. faveatus (Valenciennes), E. 
gabriellae  Randall  and  Heemstra,  E.  heniochus  Fowler, 
E. indistinctus Randall and Heemstra, E. irroratus (For-
ster), E. latifasciatus (Temminck and Schlegel), E. lebre-
tonianus (Hombron and Jacquinot), E. longispinis (Kner), 
E. magniscuttis Postel, Fourmanoir, and Guézé, E. poe-
cilonotus (Temminck and Schlegel), E. polylepis Randall 
and  Heemstra,  E.  polystigma  (Bleeker),  E.  posteli  For-
manoir and Crosnier, E. sexfasciatus (Valenciennes), E. 
socialis (Günther), E. stictus Randall and Allen, E. stoliz-
kae (Day), E. suborbitalis Amaoka and Randall, E. sum-
mana  (Forsskål),  E.  timorensis  Randall  and  Allen,  E. 
trophis Randall and Allen, E. tuamotoensis Fourmanoir.

Genus Gonioplectrus Gill

Type species: Plectropoma hispanum Cuvier. Type locality: 

Martinique.

Included species: G. hispanus (Cuvier).

Genus Hyporthodus Gill

Type species: Hyporthodus ﬂ avicauda [=Epinephelus nivea-
tus (Valenciennes in Cuvier and Valenciennes)] Type lo-
cality: Newport, Rhode Island.

Included species: H. niveatus (Valenciennes), H. niphobles 
(Gilbert  and  Starks),  H.  exsul  (Fowler),  H.  acanthistius 
(Gilbert), H. ﬂ avolimbatus (Poey), H. mystacinus (Poey), 
H. septemfasciatus (Thunberg), H. octofasciatus (Grifﬁ n), 
H.  nigritus  (Holbrook),  H.  ergastularias  (Whitley),  H. 
quernus (Seale).

Species incertae sedis: H. darwinensis (Randall and Heem-
stra),  H.  haifensis  (Ben-Tuvia),  H.  perplexus  (Randall, 
Hoese, and Last).

Genus Mycteroperca Gill

Type species: Serranus olfax Jenyns (by subsequent desig-

nation of Gill, 1866). Type locality: Galápagos Islands.

Included  species:  M.  acutirostris  (Valenciennes),  M.  al-
bomarginata (Boulenger), M. bonaci (Poey), M. caninus 
(Valenciennes), M. cidi Cervigón, M. costae (Steindach-
ner), M. fusca (Lowe), M. goreensis (Valenciennes), M. 
interstialis  (Poey),  M.  jordani  (Jenkins  and  Evermann), 
M. marginatus (Lowe), M. microlepis (Goode and Bean), 
M. morrhua (Valenciennes), M. olfax (Jenyns), M. phenax 
Jordan  and  Swain,  M.  prionura  Rosenblatt  and  Zahur-
anec, M. radiatus (Day), M. rosacea (Streets), M. rubra 
(Bloch),  M.  tigris  (Valenciennes),  M.  venenosa  (Lin-
naeus), M. xenarcha Jordan.

Genus Plectropomus Oken

Type  species:  Bodianus  maculatus  Bloch  (by  subsequent 
designation of Jordan, Tanaka, and Snyder). Type local-
ity:  Japan  (probably  erroneously  reported  for  Java; 
Heemstra and Randall, 1993).

Included species: P. areolatus Rüppell, P. laevis (Lacepède), 
P. leopardus (Lacepède), P. maculatus (Bloch), P. oligo-
canthus  Bleeker,  P.  pessuliferus  Fowler,  P.  punctatus 
Quoy and Gaimard.

Genus Saloptia Smith

Type  species:  Saloptia  powelli  Smith.  Type  locality:  Cook 

Islands.

Included species: S. powelli Smith.

Genus Triso Randall, Johnson, and Lowe

Type species: Serranus dermopterus Temminck and Schle-

gel. Type locality: Nagasaki, Japan.

Included 

species:  T.  dermopterus 

(Temminck  and 

Schlegel).

Genus Variola Swainson

Type  species:  Variola  longipinna  Swainson  (=Perca  louti 

Forsskål by monotypy). Type locality: Indian Ocean.

Included  species:  V.  albimarginata  Baissac,  V. 

louti 

(Forsskål)

